If you are a linux user, you have definitely heard about Linux swap, but you may
not know exactly what it is and how to use it.

Time to change that!!

You probably know that Linux swap is somehow related to RAM and swappiness can
affect your system performance.

We will learn:

- What is Linux swap?
- Do you need Linux swap?
- What are swap partition and swap file?
- How to create a swap file?
- What is swappiness and how to adjust it?


- What is Linux swap?
---------------------

    The linux kernel usually use your RAM memory to store processes and kernel
code itself.

When there is no enough RAM space, the linux kernel takes some of data from the
RAM and writes it to the swap space on the hard disk drive. This is called the
swapping process.

This way your linux system can release some RAM space and doesn't crash due to
lack of memory.

So, linux swap is a very useful way to extend the RAM because it provides the
necessary additional memory when the RAM space has been exhausted and a process
has to be continued.

That is why when you install a Linux distribution, the installation wizard
usually asks you to assign a space for the swap partition.


- Do you need swap?
-------------------

With so many processes running in an OS, it is not possible for OS to keep all
the process in memory all the time. Also, if a single process is bigger than
the available memory in RAM, OS can't keep this process in RAM.

So, the idea is that, we keep only the required 'PAGES' of a process in the
memory, and keep all the other PAGES(not required at the moment) in hard-disk,
called as swap memory.

To achieve this, the very first thing OS needs to do is that, it needs to know
how much swap memory it has in hard-disk to keep the PAGES. The more swap
memory it has, the more PAGES OS can keep inside it.

With using swap memory from hard-disk, there are 2 options for OS:

1. Load all the pages of a process in memory and later move out some if it needs
to make some space in memory.
2. Load only the required pages from hard-disk to memory and later move them to
the swap memory on need basis.

On each virtual memory access:

Get the VPN from a virtual address and check the TLB:
    if (TLB hit, VPN->PFN is present)
        -> Replace VPN with PFN in virtual address, this is your physical
           address.
    else (TLB Miss, VPN->PFN is not present)
        -> Go and check the process page table using 'Page table base register'.
            if ("Page hit", 'presence' bit in PTE is 'TRUE')
                -> Replace TLB with the VPN->PFN association and search the
                    TLB again.
            else ("Page fault", 'presence' bit in the PTE is 'FALSE')
                -> Find the page in the swap memory and load this page in the
                    RAM (using some policy like LRU), and then modify the PTE
                    for related VPN->PFN associations, also modify the TLB for
                    the same and look for the VPN->PFN again in the TLB.

Note : Swap space has on disadvantage - It is much slower than RAM, because
swap-out and swap-in of pages in hard-disk, is slower.

So, adding a swap space wont make your computer faster, it will only help to
overcome some limitations posed by the RAM size.

- What are swap partition and swap file?
----------------------------------------

    In linux, there are two options for a swap space :

        (1) Swap partition.
        (2) A swap file.

(1) Swap Partition : Swap partition is just part of your hard drive which is
reserved for a swap space. It is sort of hard coded in your hard drive. So, is
usually not that easy to change.

We create swap partition during a Linux distribution installation.

There are some common practises, we can use,
    - If your computer has 1Gb of RAM space or less, the swap partition
should be twice the size of the RAM.
    - If you have between 2Gb to 4Gb of RAM, the size of swap partition should
be equal to the RAM.
    - For RAM of 8 Gb, swap can be half of the RAM.
    - Finally, if you have more than 8 Gb of RAM, then it is enough to have
2-4 Gb of swap space.

But everything depends on your use case.

You can check the size of your swap space, you can run below command.

[ ] swapon
NAME      TYPE   SIZE  USED PRIO
/swapfile file 448.5M 63.5M   -2

Note : You can use 'swapon'/'swapoff' to enable/disable the swapping. Check
manual pages for both for more details.


(2) A swap file: Alternatively to a swap partition, you can create a Linux swap
File after the OS installation.

The modern Linux kernel allows swapping to a swap file instead of a swap
partition.

A swap file has an advantage over a swap partition that you can change the size
of your swap anytime simply by changing a swap file size.

If you want to create a swap file, first run this command.

(1) First create a file of 1 Gig
[ ] sudo fallocate -l 1G /swapfile

(2) Set the file persmissions
[ ] sudo chmod 600 /swapfile

(3) Make it a swap file
[ ] sudo mkswap /swapfile
Setting up swapspace version 1, size = 1024 MiB (1073737728 bytes)
no label, UUID=c5c09588-d681-47aa-ada7-0dcc5a87d191

(4) Switch on the swapping on this file
[ ]  sudo swapon /swapfile

(5) Make the changes permanent
Add below lines in the file '/etc/fstab'

#swap file
/swapfile   swap    swap    defaults    0   0

[ ] sudo vim /etc/fstab <-- open this file and add above 2 lines.

(6) Check your changes
[ ] sudo free -h
              total        used        free      shared  buff/cache   available
Mem:          980Mi       467Mi       217Mi       8.0Mi       295Mi       361Mi
Swap:         1.0Gi          0B       1.0Gi

(7) Reboot the device to make it effective.

Note : If you want to make any change in the swap file, you can first switchoff
the swap property of the swap file, the delete it and then create new one as
above.

To first switch off the swapping you can use.

[ ] sudo swapoff -v /swapfile

- What is swappiness and how to adjust it?
------------------------------------------

Swappiness is a property of linux kernel, that defines, how often this swap file
will be used.

As you already know RAM is always faster than hard disk drive.

Whenever your process is operating more on data, there are chances that Linux
will put some of your process data in the hard disk(swapping). If you want to
reduce this swapping you an adjust the swappiness.

Small swappiness == use more RAM

Normally, the default swapiness value is 60. Smaller the value, lesser swaps
will be done.

This swappiness, contributes to the 'swap_tendency'. This 'swap_tendency' is
used in linux kernel to decide whether to do swap or not.

swap_tendency = (mapped_ratio/2) + distress + vm_swappiness;

To check the swapiness value, run below command:

[ ] cat /proc/sys/vm/swappiness
60

You will see the deafult value as 60.

If you want to modify the default value, you need to edit the file
'etc/sysctl.conf' and add the following.

vm.swappiness=10

10 is most commonly recommonded value. Also, this setting is required when you
have more than 4Gb of RAM.

Again, in order to apply these changes you need to reboot the system.

After reboot '/proc/sys/vm/swappiness' will show swappiness as 10.
